A GeoAI framework for detecting risk zones from illegal dumping sites in Khulna, Bangladesh

Abstract

Illegal dumping is a major challenge of municipal solid waste management. A significant portion of waste is being dumped illegally throughout the city. This improper waste disposal creates serious ecological degradation, environmental hazards, public health risks, and urban planning challenges. This study presents a Positive-Unlabeled  learning framework for detecting illegal dumping sites using GeoAI. Seven machine learning algorithms were trained on 70% of 341 confirmed IDS locations across 10m*10m resolution grids covering the Khulna City Corporation, Bangladesh. The remaining 30% data were reserved for independent testing. The best model was selected using the weighted Area Under Curve (AUC)-F1 score calculated from spatial cross-validation, and the selected best model was then evaluated on the independent hold-out test set. Random Forest achieved the highest AUC (0.883) and F1 (0.820) as well as performed better across all weighting schemes. Top three factors behind illegal dumping were roads, drains and buildings. The predicted risk level shows that the very high and high risk zones are concentrated along roads and urban centers. This study introduces the first GeoAI framework for illegal dumping site detection in Khulna, Bangladesh. This framework will also be effective in other cities to detect illegal dumping sites at community level. This methodology can help municipal authorities to develop a waste management plan that addresses both illegal dumping challenges and long-term infrastructure planning.
